docs: add QuotaPolicy capability guide (#1947)
envoyproxy/ai-gateway: site/docs/capabilities/traffic/quota-policy.md

---
id: quota-policy
title: Quota Policy
sidebar_position: 6
---

# Quota Policy

`QuotaPolicy` enables token-based quota management for AI inference services in Envoy AI Gateway.

> When a backend's quota is exceeded, requests are rejected with a `429 Too Many Requests` status code.

Reviewer: The request is rejected when **all** route-able backends quota has been exceeded (due to the quota being in quota mode)

> When a backend's quota is exceeded, requests are rejected with a `429 Too Many Requests` status code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When all related backend's quota are exceeded, requests are rejected with a `429 Too Many Requests` status code.
```

> When all related backend's quota is exceeded, requests are rejected with a `429 Too Many Requests` status code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When all related backend's quota are exceeded, requests are rejected with a `429 Too Many Requests` status code.
```

QuotaPolicy manages **total consumption budgets** (for example, 100,000 tokens per hour). This is
distinct from [usage-based rate limiting](./usage-based-ratelimiting.md), which controls **request
velocity** (for example, requests per second). Use QuotaPolicy when you need to cap cumulative token
spend across a time window.
:::

## Overview

Key features of QuotaPolicy:

- **Per-model token quotas** — assign token budgets to individual models served by an `AIServiceBackend`.
- **CEL cost expressions** — weight input, output, cached, and reasoning tokens differently when
  computing how much a request burns down a quota.
- **Client-selector bucket rules** — carve out per-tenant or per-header quotas using request attributes.
- **Shadow mode** — evaluate quota rules without enforcing them, for safe rollout.

## How It Works

1. A `QuotaPolicy` is attached to one or more `AIServiceBackend` resources via `targetRefs`.
2. For each completed request, the token cost is computed using the configured cost expression
   (defaults to `total_tokens`).
3. The cost is charged against the matching quota bucket (the per-model default bucket, or a matching
   bucket rule).

> 4. When a bucket's quota is exceeded, subsequent matching requests receive `429 Too Many Requests`.

Reviewer: Similar to above, quota mode only returns 429 when all available quota is exceeded 

https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit/pull/1045

> 4. When a bucket's quota is exceeded, subsequent matching requests receive `429 Too Many Requests`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. When all related quota buckets for that model are exceeded, subsequent matching requests receive `429 Too Many Requests`.
```

  - modelName: gpt-4
    quota:
      # Cached input tokens count as 1/10 of a regular input token;
      # output tokens count 6x.
      costExpression: "input_tokens + cached_input_tokens / 10u + output_tokens * 6u"
      defaultBucket:
        limit: 50000
        duration: "1h"
```

:::tip
Use a custom cost expression when token types have significantly different costs with your provider —
for example, output tokens are typically more expensive than input tokens.

The token variables are **unsigned integers**, so numeric literals must carry a `u` suffix (for
example `output_tokens * 6u`) and the expression must evaluate to a non-negative integer. Integer
division truncates (`cached_input_tokens / 10u`); for an exact fractional weight, cast through
floating point — for example `uint(double(cached_input_tokens) * 0.1)`.
:::

### Bucket Mode

The `mode` field on a per-model `quota` controls how the `defaultBucket` and matching `bucketRules`
interact when a request matches one or more rules.

Currently only **`Shared`** mode is supported (it is also the default, so the field can be omitted):

- The request is charged to **all** matching `bucketRules` **and** the `defaultBucket`.

> - The request is allowed only if quota is available in **every** matching bucket.

Reviewer: https://github.com/envoyproxy/ai-gateway/pull/2271

Updated as this is the inverse

> - The request is allowed only if quota is available in **every** matching bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The request is allowed only if quota is available in **at least one** matching bucket.
```

bucket rule, all quota checks are performed (cache lookups, counter updates, telemetry), but the
outcome is never enforced — the request always succeeds even if the quota is exceeded.

```yaml
bucketRules:
  - clientSelectors:
      - headers:
          - name: x-tenant-id
            type: Distinct
    quota:
      limit: 5000
      duration: "1h"
    shadowMode: true # Evaluate but do not enforce.
```

:::tip
Use shadow mode when rolling out a new quota rule. Monitor the telemetry to confirm the limit is set
correctly, then enable enforcement by removing `shadowMode` (or setting it to `false`).
:::

Shadow mode is configured per bucket rule. It cannot be set on the `defaultBucket`.

## Duration Format

The `duration` field selects the sliding-window size. It must be exactly one of the following values:

| Value  | Window     |
| ------ | ---------- |
| `"1s"` | One second |
| `"1m"` | One minute |
| `"1h"` | One hour   |
| `"1d"` | One day    |

The window is fixed-size — arbitrary multiples such as `"30s"` or `"15m"` are **not** valid and will
be rejected by the CRD schema. Choose the `limit` to express your budget within one of these windows.

## Service-Wide Quota

> The `serviceQuota` field applies a single budget to **all** models served by the targeted backend,

Author: @aabchoo let me know if this is correct that it is not currently an enforced limit

Reviewer: We currently do not enforce this limit
